# Windows v Linux - Basics

This is my documentation and written information for the video "Windows V Linux - Basics" uploaded on my [youtube channel](https://studio.youtube.com/channel/UCfp-xR7cpyLOXVW8MYr59WA), if haven't watched the video yet then click [here](https://youtu.be/9dgcCE277V8) to watch the video. Below starts the extended version of the description

Hello everyone, So I decided to make a playlist on youtube named "Live On Linux". Yes as per name it will be a series of videos on the linux based tutorials. I made up to this because I heard many people say that linux is not stable and unsupported and many people cannot use it as a regular distro. They keep having bugs and problems while setting up, that eventually leads to the formatting of computer system and reinstalling the distro once again.
The series will go on for many years as I will make tutorials as well as expailanations. The series will contain videos from the Windows v/s Linux to the server handling via linux. The main reasons I am making this video is because many young devs do not know well about the geeky linux kernel. 

This is the first video of the series. I will make you expain the difference between the Microsoft Windows and the Linux operating systems. This is the most popular discussion running on the internet and never stops as both operating systems are turning their ways to defeat each other in the other one's strong point. The first part of the video is this one which contains the basic differences between the windows and linux operating systems. The basic differences means the top level topics on which these operating systems are being compared on a regular basis. Such famous topics on which windows and linux are differentiated are : OPEN SOURCE, POPULARITY, EASE OF USE (USER FLEXIBILITY), VIRUS IMMUNITY, and INTERNAL WORKINGS.

* ### OPEN SOURCE :-
Coming on to the first topic, the open source. First of all, we have all heard about the open source softwares and what are they. A software being open sourced means the source code of the software is available to the world and these kind of softwares have the perfect documentation that a user needs for understanding the proper usage of the software and understand on how the developer has created the software.
The Linux is an open source operating system which has its source code available on the net and users can also get upto date via git repositories of it. The users can either install it by its compiled version or can compile it from the source itself. This also means the linux operating system is free to use, but it does not imply that the linux operating system is a weak operating system. It is considered as very secure operating system due to its open source. That makes many developers around the world to contribute to its source and making it better in terms of portablity on different platforms, new features and securing the holes in the system. There are about millions of developers in the linux community. Due to this reason, there are many linux distros with different flavours available to the people around the world. On the other hand the Windows operating systems are not an open-sourced software and takes charges to activate, that makes many users to get indulged into piracy and used the vulnerable versions of cracked windows. The Windows is operated by MicroSoft Corporation and usually handled by a few developers hired by them.
The open source feature allows the user to alter any property of the program. Thus you can make any configuration in the linux but that is not the case in the windows as the Windows operating system, everything is pre configured and only limited configuration can be done like changing themes and wallpapers :-).

* ### POPULARITY :-
The second topic is the popularity, here windos has clear win due to its pre-configuration and many times we get computers (desktops and laptops) pre-packed with windows. Although, the owner of Microsoft is the richest person in the world, thats how we know it. The windows is much more pupular than linux because it provide features that make it easy to use. The linux might seem popular but only within the computer geek world. The windows has achieved this feat due its features like the decent gui, pre packed applications, no need to type commands, everything is done, just use it. Also if we install the windows by ourselves, the installer is pretty easy to use. On the other hand, linux OS are considered harder to use due to self configuration methods, and maximum good stuff is via command line. But exceptions are started to develop here, as the certain debian based linux distros like Ubuntu and Mint are providing with such good GUI and pre-configuration that makes it user friendly. The Ubuntu is most popular linux distro to be known until now.
The windows is mostly popular between normal day-to-day users to the programmers, on the other hand the linux operating systems are famous among the computer programmers, pentesters, sys admins and web servers. Google and other big companies uses the linux as its web servers

* ### EASE OF USE :-
The third topic of discussion, here the Windows again has a clear win over the linux distros. The reason again is same due to its decent GUI, pre-configured and pre-packed stuffs that makes the user to use much less efforts while using his/her computer. The linux seems pretty tough here again. Installation of softwares is easy as we only have to google for our software's compiled version. But linux makes it harder and well as more cool too, we have to compile the applications from the source in order to install them on our system. Here we can change the configuration of the app services according to what we want. Seems harder, but latest linux distros are providing with good package managers that help in automation of these stuffs. The Ubuntu and such like distros are providing with the good listed graphical package managers to use. 
For a complete computer new bie, Windows is a good choice as it does not needs you to be an expert at terminal. Also if a newbie in linux destroy root files, then the whole filesystem wont be able boot again or cannot function properly. If you are just using computer to listen music or playing games, you surely don't want to waste time by compiling the source codes.

* ### VIRUS IMMUNITY :-
On the basis of this topic, the linux has a clear win over the windows due to the fact linux is considered fully invulnerable to viruses and worms. The fact is the open source feature makes the developers to work on the linux making it more secure such that no holes arise in the security. On the other hand, the windows sucks at this part. Due to the fact, maximum users use the pirated and non-updated versions of windows that have higher chances of bugs. The popularity of windows makes the hackers easy to create viruses for windows making it spread easier. Also in the windows, every computer has same filesystem methods. The main files are located in the C:/bla/bla/IwontSay and hence the virus if gets access to the system may damage the computer easily. The linux by far remains secure to its different permissions on different files and directories. It is not like that linux is 100% secure to viruses, self-targeted viruses can harm linux systems and steal valuable data, but these things happen when the computer system is either a popular server or a enemy's home setup. 

* ### INTERNAL WORKING :-
Here, we need to understand that how a operating system is designed and what makes it possible for us to contact with the hardware and execute our instructions. The operating system contains of - The kernel, The  Base, and a set of packed applications. The Kernel is the program which binds the hardware with the software which makes the interaction easier between the user and the computer system. The base is the main program of the operating system where all the compiled versions of the operating system relies, and the additional softwares are some pre packed application with the operating system which makes the regular works easy such as a music player, notepads, word document handling, video player, internet browser, etc.
The linux kernel handles every processes from the binding of hard drives to the microprocessing, only thing it requires a decent linux base to make the interaction of the user to the hardware either via command line or via graphical interface. The linux kernel was developed by Linus Torvalds as a personal hobby, but later after making it a open source, the linux came to demand. Where as in Windows, the processing goes under many other sub processes that makes windows slower and buggy.

Now after such a knowledge, it is worth not discussing again that which one is better, Every operating system is better in its own perspective.

This is it for the first lesson, next one would be on the same topic and we are going to tell you about which one is suitable for your either windows or linux.

